Geometry-Aware Control Barrier Functions for Collision Avoidance
via Bernstein Polynomial Approximations
Siwon Jo 1, Yanze Zhang 2, Yupeng Yang3, and Wenhao Luo 2
Abstract— Safe navigation often relies on well-defined condi-
tions based on the shape of robots and obstacles, and can be
challenging when they have irregular geometries. While Control
Barrier Functions (CBFs) offer an efficient mechanism to
enforce safe set forward invariance, common shape surrogates
(e.g., spheres or super-ellipsoids) either are overly conservative
in unstructured scenes or require many local primitives, which
inflates constraint counts and degrades real-time performance.
In this paper, we introduce a novel geometry-aware Control
Barrier Function (CBF) based on Bernstein–Polynomial Signed
Distance Fields (BP-SDFs). It provides a unified way to rep-
resent the obstacles and robots, so as to represent the barrier
function with a unified minimum distance. Benefiting from the
differentiability of the Bernstein polynomials, one can easily
enforce the control constraints in a closed loop. We validate
the method’s efficiency and performance to guarantee safety in
single-robot navigation and heterogeneous multi-robot collision
avoidance via simulations under different environments.
I. INTRODUCTION
Safe navigation is both essential and inherently challeng-
ing in most robotics systems [1]–[4], especially when robots
and obstacles exhibit irregular geometries. The specification
of safe conditions depends on how shapes interact across
poses rather than on point-to-point (e.g., center-to-center)
distance [5], [6]. On the other hand, enforcing safe motions
needs to consider the dynamics and control limits of the
robots, as well as their impact on the evolving safe con-
ditions. Thus, it is critical to characterize geometry-aware
safety that reflects the true risk of contact and design con-
trollers that can effectively enforce safety during operation.
Control Barrier Functions (CBFs) [7] have emerged as
an efficient tool for certifying safety, which are typically
implemented as safety filters that modify the nominal control
inputs to ensure the robot is always within the safe set.
However, traditional CBFs-related approaches use spheres
[8] or super-ellipsoids [9] to define the safe state space by
benefiting from their simplicity and differentiability, which
would not work well for unstructured environments. In par-
ticular, in unstructured environments, existing methods either
inflate the geometry of robots and obstacles [10] or approx-
imate obstacle boundaries with sets of small spheres [11],
∗This work was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Founda-
tion under Grants 2530297 and 2528997.
1Siwon Jo is with the GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. Email:jo16@seas.upenn.edu
2Yanze Zhang and Wenhao Luo are with the Department of Com-
puter Science, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
Email:{yzhan361,wenhao}@uic.edu
3Yupeng Yang is with the Department of Computer Science, Uni-
versity of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, USA. Email:
yyang52@charlotte.edu
[12]. Nevertheless, the former introduces overly conservative
behaviors, and the latter increases the number of constraints,
which in turn impacts the efficiency of the solution.
In this context, the work in [13] builds non-conservative
CBFs by computing differentiable signed distances (and
penetration depth) between a polytopic robot and polytopic
obstacles via convex programs in the Minkowski-difference
space, which supports geometry-exact safety constraints
within a real-time Control Lyapunov Function – Control
Barrier Function (CLF–CBF) control framework. However,
the safety is enforced pairwise per obstacle in static multi-
obstacle scenarios, which may increase infeasibility under
tight bounds and require significant computational overhead
for complex environments.
Existing works have also explored learning unified CBFs
for obstacles in real-time, but they often struggle with
computational inefficiency, which limits their application in
the real world. For example, work in [14] uses Gaussian
Process (GP) to model the CBFs. However, maintaining
and updating the GP posterior in the control loop scales
cubically with the number of data points and carries sizable
constants (e.g., kernel factorizations, hyperparameter tuning),
which makes high-rate control difficult as data accumulate.
Alternatively, [15] adopts an implicit neural representation of
the CBF with backpropagated gradients but only considers
single-robot cases, leaving inter-robot collision avoidance as
an open challenge.
More recently, the authors in [16] used Bernstein poly-
nomials to approximate signed distance fields (BP-SDF),
thereby enabling the representation of safe space. While this
advances geometric modeling, the method primarily focuses
on static safety representation and does not explicitly show
how the learned safe representation can be converted into
control constraintswith closed-loop safety guarantees. As a
result, it is not directly applicable to controller synthesis in
dynamic scenarios and multi-robot settings, where multiple
moving robots may interact closely with one another. Build-
ing on this work, we propose to extend the BP-SDF to de-
fine novel CBFs that convert pose-dependent geometry into
certifiable safety constraints directly governing collision-free
motions for the robots in real time. Specifically, we represent
both the robot and the workspace obstacles using a BP-SDF
in their body frames and evaluate them in the world frame
via rigid transformations. Then, the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker
(KKT) conditions are analyzed to find the minimum distance
that is used to define our geometry-aware CBFs. Benefiting
from the differentiability of the Bernstein polynomials, we
are able to explicitly define the admissible control space,
arXiv:2605.30696v1  [cs.RO]  29 May 2026
leading to collision-free movements of the robots with irregu-
lar shapes. This yields forward-invariant safety with minimal
deviation from nominal commands and scales to dynamic,
multi-robot scenes. Ourcontributionscan be summarized
as:
•We introduce a novel unified barrier function repre-
sentation with a single SDF for multiple obstacles
using Bernstein polynomials. This approach provides a
common template for deriving geometry-aware control
constraints for safe navigation in unstructured environ-
ments.
•We define a novel notion ofGeometry-aware Control
Barrier Functionsbuilt on Bernstein polynomial repre-
sentations and explicitly derive control constraints from
the proposed CBFs for arbitrary smooth convex SDF
level sets, which yields closed-loop safety certificates.
•We include results from the experiments for multi-robot
collision avoidance and multi-obstacle robot navigation
that verify the effectiveness of the framework.
II. PRELIMINARIES
Considering a team ofNrobots moving in thed-
dimensional spaceR d, the position of each robot is denoted
asx i∈X i⊂R d,∀i∈{1,...,N}, with dynamics governed
by:
˙xi =f i(xi) +g i(xi)ui (1)
wheref i :R d →R d andg i :R d →R d×q are locally
Lipschitz continuous andu i∈R q is the control input for
roboti.
A. Control Barrier Functions
In this section, we briefly review the concept of Control
Barrier Functions (CBFs) [7]. Given the control-affine system
in Eq. (1), a desired safe set for the state of roboti
can be specified as the 0-superlevel set of a continuously
differentiable functionh:R d→R,
Hi ={x i∈R d :h(x i)≥0}.(2)
CBFs have been used to design control constraints that
enforce the forward invariance of the safe setH i for robot
i, i.e., if the system starts withinH i, it remains there for all
future time under satisfying controllers. The key result can
be summarized as follows.
Lemma 1.(Summarized from [7]) Given a dynamical system
affine in control and a desired setH i as the 0-superlevel
set of acontinuously differentiablefunctionh(x i) :X i→
R, the functionhis called a control barrier function, if
there exists an extended class-Kfunction 1 κ(·)such that
supui∈Ui{˙h(xi,u i)} ≥ −κ(h(xi))for allx i ∈ Xi. The
admissible control space for any Lipschitz continuous con-
trolleru i∈U i renderingH i forward invariant (i.e., keeping
the system statex i inH i over time) thus becomes:
B(xi) ={u i∈U i|Lfh(xi) +L gh(xi)ui +κ(h(x i))≥0}
1In the rest of this letter, we select the particular choice ofκ(h(x i)) =
γh(xi)withγas a user-defined parameter [7].
whereL f andL g denote the Lie derivatives along the vector
fieldsfandg, respectively.
Existing work [8] leverages Lemma 1 to enforce pairwise
distance constraints between robots or between robots and
obstacles. However, directly encoding such constraints be-
comes cumbersome in environments with complex or irreg-
ular geometries. Note that when multiple CBF constraints
are present, the safety guarantee relies on the composition
of CBFs. Readers are referred to [9], [17] for detailed
discussion. For systems with higher-order dynamics, the
corresponding extension can be found in [18]. This motivates
the use of a more general geometric representation of safe
sets, which leads us to the notion of Signed Distance Fields
(SDF) and Bernstein polynomials discussed next.
B. Signed Distance Fields Representation using Bernstein
Polynomials
Existing work has adoptedSigned Distance Field(SDF)
[19] as a general representation of safe set of states. This pro-
vides an implicit and differentiable description of arbitrary
geometries summarized below.
Definition 2.(Summarized from [19])[Signed Distance
Field] For a setΩ⊂R d, the signed distance field is defined
as
SΩ(p) =±inf
p′∈∂Ω
∥p−p ′∥2,(3)
wherepis a point in the Euclidean space, withS Ω(p)<0
ifp∈Ω,S Ω(p) = 0ifp∈∂Ω, andS Ω(p)>0otherwise.
It is noted that directly storing or evaluatingS Ω(p)for
arbitrary shapes can be computationally expensive, and in
many cases the complex geometry ofΩmakes an explicit
analytic form intractable. To overcome this challenge, exist-
ing work has employedBernstein polynomial(BP) approx-
imations of SDFs [16], which yield a compact and smooth
parameterization suitable for optimization and control.
Definition 3.(Summarized from [20])[Bernstein Polynomial
Basis] Givenξ∈[0,1], letϕ(ξ)∈R Q be the vector of basis
functions whoseq-th element, for Bernstein polynomials of
orderQ(degreeQ−1), is
ϕq(ξ) =
Q−1
q

ξq(1−ξ) Q−1−q, q= 0,...,Q−1.
With this, for any pointp∈R d, the multivariate basis is
constructed via the Kronecker product
Ψ(p) =
dO
p=1
ϕ(ξp)∈R Qd
,(4)
whereξ p = [p]p−[p] min
p
[p]maxp −[p] minp
∈[0,1]andp= 1,...,d
are the dimension-wise normalized coordinates ofp(i.e.,
the normalized value of the point’sp-th dimension), where
[p]min and[p] max cover the maximum relative distance.
Thus, given Definition 3, the SDF is approximated as a
weighted combination of theQ d tensor–product Bernstein
basis functions (orderQper dimension) [16]:
ˆSΩ(p) =⟨Ψ(p),w⟩= Ψ(p) ⊤w,(5)
where ˆSΩ(p)∈R,Ψ(p)∈R Qd
is the multivariate Bernstein
basis vector evaluated at the pointp, andw∈R Qd
are the
coefficients.⟨·,·⟩is the operation of the inner product.
Following [16], the coefficientswcan be obtained via
linear least-squares regression under the assumption that
robot shapes are learned offline. Suppose we haveKsam-
pled points{p (j),S Ω(p(j))}K
j=1 with ground-truth signed
distancesS Ω(p(j)). By stacking the basis evaluations into
a design matrixΨ∈R Qd×K and the ground-truth distances
intof∈R K, the linear regression problem is
w∗ = arg min
w
∥Ψ⊤w−f∥ 2
2 (6)
IfΨhas full row rank, the closed-form solution can be
formally defined as:
w∗ =
 
Ψ Ψ⊤−1
Ψ f(7)
With the closed-form coefficientsw ∗, we can obtain the
smooth SDF approximation ˆSΩ(p) = Ψ(p) ⊤w∗ over the
workspace. However, obtaining the solution via explicit in-
version of a large matrix is unnecessary and often prohibitive,
both computationally and in memory, and can be numerically
unstable [21]. Readers are referred to [16] for more detailed
discussions.
C. Problem Statement
In this paper, our objective is to develop a control frame-
work thatleverages the Bernstein–polynomial approxima-
tion ˆSΩ of the SDF andemploys control barrier functions
(CBFs)to encode and enforce safety in realistic, complex
environments. While the BP–SDF surrogate offers a compact
and differentiable geometric representation, translating this
approximation into formal safety guarantees remains non-
trivial in cluttered scenes and in the presence of interacting
agents. With that, given any control boundu max∈Rof each
roboti, the problem becomes how to minimally modify any
pre-defined nominal inputu nom with BP–SDF–defined safe
set, i.e., enforcing nonnegative distance between the robot
ˆSR(·)and the non-robot ˆSO(·):
u∗ = arg min
u
||u−u nom||2 (8)
s.t.x∈{dist( ˆSO(·) = 0, ˆSR(·) = 0)≥0}(9)
||u||≤u max
Accordingly, in this paper, we focus on two questions:
•Single-robot safe navigation.Given a BP–SDF approx-
imation of the workspace containing multiple irregular-
shaped static obstacles, how can we transfer the state
constraints in Eq. (9) to control constraints and design
a control framework that can guarantee that the robot
safely navigates in the workspace?
•Multi-robot extension.Given a team ofNrobots
where each robotimaintains a robot-specific BP–SDF
ˆSi
Ω, how can this framework be extended to multiple
robots so that collisions among moving agents are
avoided?
III. METHOD
In this section, we build on the unified SDF representation
in Eq. (5) to formulate novel control barrier functions that di-
rectly encode geometry-aware collision avoidance conditions
and derive corresponding control constraints. We first present
the single-robot SDF barrier certificates and then extend the
approach to the multi-robot setting.
A. Unified Barrier Function with Bernstein polynomials
LetO= SM
j=1oj denote the union of all obstacles.
Following the work [16], we use Bernstein polynomials to
represent the Signed Distance Field (SDF) of the robotx i and
obstaclesx obs
o ∈O. As shown in Fig. 1(a) and leveraging
Eq. (5), we represent the robotiby a SDF ˆSi
R(·)and the
composite obstacle set by a singleunifiedSDF ˆSO(·).
ˆSi
R(pi) =⟨Ψ(p i),w i⟩, ˆSO(pobs
o ) =⟨Ψ(p obs
o ),w o⟩
where ˆSi
R(·)is in the robot’s local frame and ˆSO(·)is in the
unified obstacle frame.p i andp obs
o represent the pointpin
the robot frame and unified obstacle frame.
We define the functionΦ(x,p local)to transform the point
in the local framep local to the global framep. With this,
Fi(xi,p) = ˆSi
R(Φ−1
i (xi,p))(10)
represents the distance between any pointpand the boundary
of the robotiin the space.
Therefore,F i(xi,p) = 0can be used to define the zero
level set for the robotigiven its SDF.
Inspired by [22], we first characterize the safe space using
the minimum distance between the robot and the composite
obstacle set. To this end, we formulate the following opti-
mization problem to find the closest pointp ∗ on the obstacle
boundary to the robot:
p∗
i,o = arg min
p
Fi(xi,p)(11)
s.t.F o(xobs
o ,p) = 0
AsF i(xi,p)denotes the signed distance frompto the
boundary of roboti, minimizing it corresponds to finding the
closest point to the robot. And the constraintF o(xobs
o ,p) = 0
enforces thatplies on the obstacle boundary. Therefore, as
illustrated in Fig. 1, the solutionp ∗
i,o is exactly the obstacle
boundary point with the minimum distance from the robot,
which is then used to define the barrier function for collision
avoidance. By solving the optimization problem in (11), one
can obtain the optimal solutionp ∗
i,o, which is the closest
point on the obstacle boundary to roboti.
Hence, to formally characterize safety, we directly uti-
lize the property of the BP-SDF, which returns the signed
distance from the robot to any given point. By evaluating
Fig. 1: Examples of the level sets for SDF approximation using Bernstein
polynomials on robots and obstacles.(a)With a safety marginl∈R, the
green contour represents thel-level set of the approximated SDF of the robot
i. The three blue contours represent thel-level set of the approximated
SDF w.r.t. all three obstacles in the workspace using a single Bernstein
polynomial representation.(b)The green contour represents thel-level set of
the approximated SDF of the robotiin the robot frameO i, satisfying ˆSR≥
l.(c)The blue contours represent thel-level set of the approximated SDF
of the composite obstacle setOin the frameO O, satisfying ˆSO≥l.(d)
The green and blue contours represent thel-level sets of the approximated
SDF for robotiandj.
the robot’s SDF at the closest obstacle-boundary pointp ∗
i,o,
we formally define theGeometry-aware Control Barrier
Function (CBF)as:
h(xi,x obs
o ) =F i(xi,p∗
i,o)(12)
Therefore,h(x i,x obs
o )≥0indicates that robotiremains
away from the obstacle, whileh(x i,x obs
o )<0indicates
overlap between the robot and the obstacle. Accordingly, the
safe set is defined as
Hobs
i,o =

(xi,x obs
o )∈R d|h(x i,x obs
o )≥0
	
.(13)
B. Single-robot Geometry-aware Control Barrier Certifi-
cates
By using the KKT condition to solve the problem in
Eq. (11), we can obtain the optimal value of the barrier
functionhand the closest point to the robot,p ∗. We propose
the following proposition to define the safe control space.
Proposition 4(Geometry-aware Control Barrier Certifi-
cates).Consider robotiwith control–affine dynamics(1)
moving in a workspace with any-shaped static obstacles
which are enclosed by a unified SDF ˆSO. The barrier func-
tionh(x i,x obs
o )and the corresponding obstacle boundary
point arep∗
i,o in Eq.(11). Following Lemma. 1, for the robot
iand the environment with obstaclesO, the admissible con-
trol space for any Lipschitz continuous controller rendering
the safe set in Eq.(13)forward invariant, thus becomes:
Bobs
u =

ui∈U i|a i(xi,p∗
i,o) +A i(xi,p∗
i,o)ui
≥−γh(x i,x obs
o )
	 (14)
wherea i(xi,p∗
i,o) =∇ xiFi(xi,p∗
i,o)⊤fi(xi)and
Ai(xi,p∗
i,o) =∇ xiFi(xi,p∗
i,o)⊤gi(xi).
Proof.We assume the BP-SDF level sets are convex such
that the closest pointp ∗
i,o changes smoothly without discon-
tinuous jumps. Additionally,||∇F i||̸= 0on the boundary of
the BP-SDF learned offline.
With this, differentiating Eq. (12) with respect to timet
using the chain rule yields:
˙h(xi,x obs
o ) =∇ xiFi(xi,p∗
i,o)⊤ ˙xi +∇ pFi(xi,p∗
i,o)⊤ ˙p∗
i,o
Based on the KKT conditions of the optimization problem in
Eq. (11), the spatial gradient∇ pFi(xi,p∗)is parallel to the
normal vector of the obstacle boundary atp ∗. Since ˙p∗ is
tangent to the obstacle boundary, their inner product is zero,
i.e.,∇ pFi(xi,p∗)⊤ ˙p∗ = 0.
Substituting this identity gives us the general form:
˙h(xi,x obs
o ) =∇ xiFi(xi,p∗
i,o)⊤ ˙xi (15)
Following Lemma 1, the safe control space can thus be
given by Eq. (14).□
This defines the admissible control space that ensures the
robot to stay away from the obstacle boundary. Finally, one
can define the safe controlleru ∗
i for a robot navigating in a
multi-obstacle scenario by minimally modifying the nominal
controlu nom
i with Quadratic Programming (QP):
u∗
i = arg min
ui
||ui−u nom
i ||2
2 (16)
s.t.a i(xi,p∗
i,o) +A i(xi,p∗
i,o)ui≥−γh(x i,x obs
o )
||ui||≤u max
i
whereu max
i denotes the control bound for roboti.
C. Handling Non-Smoothness in Composite Obstacles
As defined in Section III-A, representing multiple obsta-
cles as a single composite setOprovides a unified geometric
constraint. However, in such a case, the closest pointp ∗
i,o
on the obstacle boundary can discontinuously jump between
different obstacles while the robot is moving. This can
make the distance function non-smooth, which violates the
continuous differentiability property of CBFs.
To deal with the composite set of obstacles scenario while
maintaining smoothness, we adopt a Configuration Space (C-
space) approach. By approximating the robot as a bounding
circle of radiusr[8], we inflate the ground-truth composite
obstacles using the Minkowski sum to create the C-space
obstacles, denoted asO C =O⊕D(r), whereD(r)represents
a disk of radiusr. We then construct a unified BP-SDF
for the C-space, denoted as ˆSOC(·). However, if this causes
overly conservative behaviors of the robot, we can define
each obstacle as an individual safety constraint.
Fig. 2: C-space (red) of composite obstacle setO C inflated by the radiusr
of the roboti(green). The right figure shows the SDF ˆSOC of the C-space
(blue contours) with a user-defined safety margin level setl.
In this C-space formulation, the robot is treated as a point
xi. The barrier function is defined by the BP-SDF of the
C-space at the robot’s position:
hobs
i (xi) = ˆSOC(xi) = Ψ(xi)⊤wo (17)
Because the Bernstein polynomial approximation is in-
herently smooth and continuously differentiable, evaluat-
ing ˆSOC(xi)guarantees a smooth CBF everywhere in the
workspace.
D. Multi-robot Geometry-aware Control Barrier Certificates
We continue to extend our Geometry-aware Control Bar-
rier Function in (12) for the multi-robot collision avoidance
case. Consider a team ofNrobots, similarly to (11), for
any pair of robotsiandj, one can calculate the closest
pointp∗
i,j on the boundaryjto roboti. Then for any pair-
wise collision avoidance in the robot team, the safety of
x={x 1,···,x i,···,x N}is defined as:
h(xi,x j) =F i(xi,p∗
i,j),∀i̸=j(18)
With this,h(x i,x j)≥0indicates that, from roboti’ view,
the robotjis sufficiently away from roboti. Accordingly,
the safe set is defined as
Hi,j =

x∈R dN|h(x i,x j)≥0
	
,∀i̸=j.(19)
Proposition 5(Multi-robot Geometry-aware Control Bar-
rier Certificates).Considering a team ofNrobots moving
in the same workspace, each robot has its own robot-
specific SDF approximated by Bernstein polynomials.u=
{u1,···,u N}is the joint control of theNrobots. As shown
in Fig. 1(d), for any pair of robotsiandj, the optimal
pointp∗
i,j moves along the surface of robotj. By taking the
time derivative of the boundary constraintF j(xj,p∗
i,j) = 0
and applying the KKT conditions, the inter-robot collision
avoidance can be enforced using the followingMulti-robot
Geometry-aware Control Barrier Certificates:
Brobots
u =

u∈U|a i(xi,p∗
i,j) +a j(xj,p∗
i,j)
+A i(xi,p∗
i,j)ui +A j(xj,p∗
i,j)uj
≥−γh(x i,x j)
	
(20)
wherea j(xj,p∗
i,j) =λ∇ xjFj(xj,p∗
i,j)⊤fj(xj),
Aj(xj,p∗
i,j) =λ∇ xjFj(xj,p∗
i,j)⊤gj(xj), and the scalar
multiplierλ=
∥∇pFi(xi,p∗
i,j)∥
∥∇pFj(xj ,p∗
i,j)∥.
Proof.Taking the time derivative ofh(x i,x j) =F i(xi,p∗
i,j)
yields ˙h(xi,x j) =∇ xiF⊤
i ˙xi +∇ pF⊤
i ˙p∗
i,j. From the KKT
stationarity conditions, we have∇ pFi =−λ∇ pFj. Substi-
tuting this gives ˙h(xi,x j) =∇ xiF⊤
i ˙xi−λ∇ pF⊤
j ˙p∗
i,j.
Becausep ∗
i,j must remain on the boundary of robotj,
the constraintF j(xj,p∗
i,j) = 0is satisfied at all times.
Differentiating this gives∇ xjF⊤
j ˙xj +∇pF⊤
j ˙p∗
i,j = 0, which
allows us to substitute out the velocity ˙p∗
i,j, yielding:
˙h(xi,x j) =∇ xiFi(xi,p∗
i,j)⊤ ˙xi +λ∇ xjFj(xj,p∗
i,j)⊤ ˙xj
(21)
Following Lemma 1, one can obtain the safe control space
for the multi-robot system in (20).□
With this, one can define the following safe controlleru ∗
for the team of robots by minimally modifying their nominal
controlu nom with the following QP:
u∗ = arg min
u
||u−u nom||2 (22)
s.t.a i(xi,p∗
i,j) +a j(xj,p∗
i,j) +A i(xi,p∗
i,j)ui
+A j(xj,p∗
i,j)uj≥−γh(x i,x j),∀i̸=j
||ui||≤u max
i ,∀i= 1,...,N
Remark 1.While it has been proven that a minimum dis-
tance function between two convex sets is a smooth function
[23], the learned SDFs are approximations, and some SDF
level sets can be non-convex even if the ground truth shape
is convex. To handle the non-smoothness, one can formulate
a constrained Quadratic Program (QP) for offline learning
and strictly enforce convexity on all level sets by constraining
second-order difference matrix of the Bernstein weightswto
be positive semi-definite.
Remark 2.It is possible that the learned SDFs with
Bernstein polynomials and the method in [16] has a small
approximation error. A user-defined safety margin level setl
can be used to guarantee the enclosure of the ground truth
shape in the learned shape by changing the constraints in
Eq.(11)asF o(xobs
o ,p)−l= 0(l≥0∈R).
Remark 3.It is possible that our method would get into
a deadlock. Readers can refer to [24]–[26] for single-robot
and multi-robot deadlock resolution.
IV. RESULTS
In this section, we conduct simulations to demonstrate
the robustness and versatility of the proposed framework.
By evaluating its performance across diverse environments,
robot dynamics, and homogeneous as well as heterogeneous
teams, we establish its broad applicability in ensuring safe
and reliable multi-robot coordination. Note that the proposed
algorithm is evaluated underdifferentsystem dynamics,
including single-integrator and unicycle dynamics.
Fig. 3:Left: A single BP-SDF (Q = 23) is used to represent five distinct
static obstacles, and its 0.27-level set is used to enclose the ground-truth
shapes of the static obstacles. The green line shows the robot trajectory start-
ing from(3.8,2.7)and visiting the designated goal position(−2.2,−3.5).
Right: The green line represents the value of the barrier function over time
steps. The barrier function is obtained from a single CBF constructed using
a BP-SDF, which compactly encodes all obstacle-related safety constraints
into one unified condition.
In the first experiment, we consider a single robot nav-
igating through an environment populated with multiple
obstacles of varying shapes. The robot dynamics are modeled
as a single-integrator system, such that ˙xi =u i, where
xi∈R 2 denotes the robot position andu i∈R 2 is the control
input. The navigation objective is to reach the designated
time-invariant goal position while avoiding collisions with
obstacles. The nominal task controller isu nom =−k(x i−
xgoal
i ), wherekis the control gain. As illustrated in Figure 3,
the robot starts atx= [3.8,2.7] ⊤ and visits the goal
xgoal = [−2.2,−3.5]⊤.
To enforce safety, we construct the control barrier function
(CBF) as in Eq. (12).p ∗ lies on the0.27-level set (setting
l= 0.27as stated in Remark. 2) of the signed distance
field approximated by a Bernstein polynomial with order
Q= 23. The use of the0.27-level set ensures that all five
obstacles are fully enclosed within asingleunified BP-SDF.
In Figure 3, the dashed contours indicate the ground-truth
obstacle boundaries, while the fading green curve in the left
subfigure illustrates the robot’s trajectory. The right subfigure
further depicts the temporal evolution of the barrier function,
confirming that the safety constraint is satisfied throughout
the navigation process.
A. Safe Navigation of Two Robots under Unicycle Dynamics
In the second set of experiments, we consider robots
governed by unicycle dynamics:
˙xi =


˙xi
˙yi
˙θi

 =


cos(θi) 0
sin(θi) 0
0 1


vi
ωi

,(23)
where[x i,y i,θ i]T denotes the state of robotiin the global
frame,v i is the linear velocity, andω i is the angular velocity.
The control limits are|v i|≤1m/s and|ω i|≤π/2rad/s.
Given the robot’s current state(x i,y i,θ i)and its corre-
sponding time-invariant goal position(x g
i,y g
i ), the nominal
task controller is designed asˆv i =k vρi,ˆωi =k ωαi,where
kv,k ω >0are proportional gains. Specifically,ρ i denotes
the Euclidean distance to the goal andα i the heading error,
given byρ i =
p
(xg
i−x i)2 + (yg
i−y i)2, θg
i = atan2(yg
i−
yi, xg
i−x i), αi =θ g
i−θ i. Alternatively, one may employ
well-developed unicycle controllers, e.g., [27], to construct
the nominal controlleru nom and drive the robot toward the
desired goal. Note that a detailed discussion of such nominal
controller design is outside the scope of this paper.
Fig. 4 illustrates the two-robot position-switching task: the
figures show the robot motions with approximated shapes
obtained from BP-SDFs. Fig. 5 shows the linear and angular
velocity inputs and their respective limits, together with the
evolution of barrier functions. The results confirm that the
robots complete the task without collision under different
dynamics, while satisfying both the safety constraint and
control bounds.
B. Safe Navigation of Four Heterogeneous Robots
The robot dynamics and the design of the task-related
controller in this experiment follow the same formulation
as in Section. IV-A. In Fig. 6, the heterogeneous example
involves four robots with distinct geometries approximated
by its own SDF. Accordingly, four separate control barrier
functions (h 1,h 2,h 3,h 4) are required. The results in the
Fig. 4 and Fig. 6 demonstrate that the proposed framework
extends naturally from homogeneous to heterogeneous multi-
robot teams while ensuring safety.
It is worth noting that, as illustrated in Fig. 6, hetero-
geneous robot shapes are difficult to approximate using
Minkowski-sum–based approaches, which typically rely on
conservative simplifications such as bounding circles or
convex polygons [13]. In contrast, our framework intro-
duces a new CBF formulation that ensures safety under
BP-SDF–based modeling of complex and realistic robot
geometries.
C. Quantitative Results
We evaluate our framework on a desktop with 64GB of
RAM and an AMD Ryzen 9 3900X processor. For each
obstacle countm∈{1,2,4,6,...,24}, we conducted five
independent randomized trials, each with adistinctobstacle
configuration anddifferentstart and goal position pair, and
report two summary metrics. (i) The average per–timestep
computation time¯τ(s/step) and (ii) the ground-truth min-
imum robot–obstacle distanced ⋆ (true set-to-set Euclidean
distance). Fig. 7 shows mean curves with shaded area: in
thetoppanel, the band denotes±1standard deviation and¯τ
shows slow growth asmincreases, indicating the efficiency
of our proposed method; in thebottompanel, the band
also denotes±1standard deviation andd ⋆ >0for all
m, demonstrating collision-free operation and robustness in
complex environments.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel method to define Con-
trol Barrier Functions using Bernstein-Polynomial Signed
Distance Field (BP-SDF). This method utilizes Bernstein
polynomials (BPs) to unify the representation of obstacles
Fig. 4: Two-robot position-switching under unicycle dynamics. The solid lines and dashed lines represent the approximated shapes by BP-SDFs and ground
truth shapes of the robots, respectively. Snapshots att= 0,50,100, and150are shown as representative time instances. The visualizations indicate that
the robots maintain collision-free execution throughout the entire position-switching process.
Fig. 5: Control input and safety analysis for the two-robot position-switching task.Left: linear velocity inputsv ∗ (solid) compared with nominal task
inputsˆv(dashed) for both robots, together with the linear velocity limits.Middle: angular velocity inputsω ∗ (solid) compared with nominal task inputs
ˆω(dashed), with the corresponding angular velocity limits.Right: evolution of the barrier function over time, which remains nonnegative, verifying that
the safety constraint is satisfied throughout the entire execution.
Fig. 6: Collision avoidance among four mobile robots with different smooth convex shapes represented by the respective SDF level sets. The right figure
shows the minimum Euclidean distance between the ground truth shapes remaining positive over time, which validates the safety guarantees as the robots
move to the designated goal positions (marked by stars with the same colors as the robots).
and robots. The numerical results across diverse environ-
ments, robot dynamics, and homogeneous as well as het-
erogeneous teams verified the effectiveness of the proposed
method. For future work, we will investigate updating the
BP-SDF coefficients online using real-time observations, so
that the geometry model can be refined after the initial offline
learning stage when the shapes of the obstacles change over
time.
REFERENCES
[1] Y . Ren, F. Zhu, G. Lu, Y . Cai, L. Yin, F. Kong, J. Lin, N. Chen, and
F. Zhang, “Safety-assured high-speed navigation for mavs,”Science
Robotics, vol. 10, no. 98, p. eado6187, 2025.
[2] Y . Zhang, Y . Lyu, S. E. Demir, X. Zhou, Y . Yang, J. Wang, and
W. Luo, “Courteous mpc for autonomous driving with cbf-inspired
risk assessment,” in2024 IEEE 27th International Conference on
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC). IEEE, 2024, pp. 2317–
2323.
[3] Y . Lyu, W. Luo, and J. M. Dolan, “Risk-aware safe control for decen-
tralized multi-agent systems via dynamic responsibility allocation,” in
Fig. 7:Quantitative results.Curves show means over five trials.Top:
per–time-step computation time; shaded area denotes±1standard devia-
tion.Bottom:minimum ground-truth robot–obstacle distance; shaded area
denotes±1standard deviation.
2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2023, pp. 9737–9744.
[4] T. Kim and D. Panagou, “Visibility-aware rrt* for safety-critical
navigation of perception-limited robots in unknown environments,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025.
[5] M. W. Otte, S. G. Richardson, J. Mulligan, and G. Grudic, “Path plan-
ning in image space for autonomous robot navigation in unstructured
environments,”Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 212–240,
2009.
[6] S. Wu, Y . Fang, N. Sun, B. Lu, X. Liang, and Y . Zhao, “Optimization-
free smooth control barrier function for polygonal collision avoidance,”
IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 2025.
[7] A. D. Ames, S. Coogan, M. Egerstedt, G. Notomista, K. Sreenath,
and P. Tabuada, “Control barrier functions: Theory and applications,”
in18th European control conference (ECC). Ieee, 2019, pp. 3420–
3431.
[8] L. Wang, A. D. Ames, and M. Egerstedt, “Safety barrier certificates for
collisions-free multirobot systems,”IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 661–674, 2017.
[9] ——, “Safe certificate-based maneuvers for teams of quadrotors using
differential flatness,” inIEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2017, pp. 3293–3298.
[10] W. Xiao, N. Mehdipour, A. Collin, A. Y . Bin-Nun, E. Frazzoli, R. D.
Tebbens, and C. Belta, “Rule-based optimal control for autonomous
driving,” inProceedings of the ACM/IEEE 12th International Confer-
ence on Cyber-Physical Systems, 2021, pp. 143–154.
[11] Y . Yang, Y . Lyu, and W. Luo, “Minimally constrained multi-robot
coordination with line-of-sight connectivity maintenance,” in2023
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 7684–7690.
[12] Y . Yang, Y . Lyu, Y . Zhang, S. Yi, and W. Luo, “Decentralized Multi-
Robot Line-of-Sight Connectivity Maintenance under Uncertainty,” in
Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), Delft, Nether-
lands, July 2024.
[13] Y .-H. Chen, S. Liu, W. Xiao, C. Belta, and M. Otte, “Control
barrier functions via minkowski operations for safe navigation among
polytopic sets,” in2025 IEEE 64th Conference on Decision and
Control (CDC), 2025, pp. 4481–4488.
[14] M. A. Khan, T. Ibuki, and A. Chatterjee, “Gaussian control barrier
functions: Non-parametric paradigm to safety,”IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 99 823–99 836, 2022.
[15] K. Long, C. Qian, J. Cort ´es, and N. Atanasov, “Learning barrier
functions with memory for robust safe navigation,”IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4931–4938, 2021.
[16] Y . Li, Y . Zhang, A. Razmjoo, and S. Calinon, “Representing robot
geometry as distance fields: Applications to whole-body manipula-
tion,” inIEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). IEEE, 2024, pp. 15 351–15 357.
[17] P. Ong, B. Capelli, L. Sabattini, and J. Cort ´es, “Nonsmooth control
barrier function design of continuous constraints for network connec-
tivity maintenance,”Automatica, vol. 156, p. 111209, 2023.
[18] W. Xiao and C. Belta, “Control barrier functions for systems with
high relative degree,” in2019 IEEE 58th conference on decision and
control (CDC). IEEE, 2019, pp. 474–479.
[19] M. Mukadam, J. Dong, X. Yan, F. Dellaert, and B. Boots, “Continuous-
time gaussian process motion planning via probabilistic inference,”
The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 37, no. 11, pp.
1319–1340, 2018.
[20] S. Calinon, “Mixture models for the analysis, edition, and synthesis
of continuous time series,” inMixture Models and Applications.
Springer, 2019, pp. 39–57.
[21] W. W. Hager, “Updating the inverse of a matrix,”SIAM review, vol. 31,
no. 2, pp. 221–239, 1989.
[22] B. Dai, R. Khorrambakht, P. Krishnamurthy, and F. Khorrami, “Sailing
through point clouds: Safe navigation using point cloud based control
barrier functions,”IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
[23] A. Thirugnanam, J. Zeng, and K. Sreenath, “Control barrier func-
tions for collision avoidance between strongly convex regions,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.13259, 2025.
[24] M. F. Reis, A. P. Aguiar, and P. Tabuada, “Control barrier function-
based quadratic programs introduce undesirable asymptotically stable
equilibria,”IEEE Control Systems Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 731–736,
2020.
[25] Y . Zhang, Y . Lyu, S. Jo, Y . Yang, and W. Luo, “Adaptive deadlock
avoidance for decentralized multi-agent systems via cbf-inspired risk
measurement,” in2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2025, pp. 14 917–14 923.
[26] W. Lee, J. Sim, J. Kim, S. Jo, W. Luo, and C. Nam, “Merry-go-
round: Safe control of decentralized multi-robot systems with deadlock
prevention,” in2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), Oct 2025, pp. 4589–4595.
[27] C. Samson, “Control of chained systems application to path following
and time-varying point-stabilization of mobile robots,”IEEE transac-
tions on Automatic Control, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 64–77, 2002.